This is June 19th. I'm in the office of Paul Geisel
at the University of Texas at Arlington. Paul is a
full professor in the Urban and Regional Planning
Program. Paul, first of all, when did you come to UT
Arlington? I came here in 1970.
When was that, Paul? 1970. Uh-huh. Where were you
before? I was at Arizona State. In planning? No.
No, I was in the Department of Sociology there. And
before that, I was the director of the War on
Poverty in Canada. In Canada? Uh-huh. Out of
which... In Ottawa. Ottawa. Uh-huh. So I was a
deputy minister there. I see. Are you Canadian?
No, I'm not. I had come there. I was a chairperson of
one of the Kennedy task forces on health services
for the poverty program. And after Kennedy's
assassination, one of the Canadians asked me if I
would like to lead that program there, so I went
there from the University of Pittsburgh. I see. So
you have a degree in sociology from Pittsburgh. I
have a degree in, yes, no, I have a degree in
sociology from Vanderbilt. Vanderbilt. Mm-hmm.
Okay. And a degree in mathematics from Chicago,
and a medical degree from Chicago. That's quite a
background. Yeah, well, I was a child when I
graduated from college, so I couldn't get a job.
You wouldn't want to know why I'm so educated. It's
because I couldn't get employed. I got out of
college when I was 16, so it's great to be a prodigy,
but what the hell are you going to do with it? And
now, in terms of the department here, what... You
mean how do I get into this department? Yeah, what
is your role in the department? Okay, I'm in the
department for essentially two reasons. One...
In the evolution of the urban affairs program here
at UTA, it became clear to us that a planning degree
of sorts was a necessary and important
ingredient. So in 1972 or 73, I can't remember the
exact dates. It could have been 74. actually came
to fruition in 75. We started a process with the
School of Architecture and several other
departments of writing proposals, and I was the
author with a fellow, Peter Stewart, over in
architecture, of the original proposal for the
MCRP at UTA. Now, that was in concert with a series
of other degrees, and because of the kind of work I
was doing as a sociologist, as a demographer in
particular, it's kind of my area in mathematical
sociology, and the kind of experience I was having
working in smaller cities, I was doing a lot of
planning, if you will, particularly in terms of
social planning and population analysis.
Well, it was a natural evolution. I'd also started
writing planning manuals for small cities and how
to train planning commissions. And we were doing a
lot of that here. I had developed this emphasis in
the small city areas and was very interested in
seeing that they could develop a planning
process. So my interest in the area, as well as the
university responsibility of having an author,
and an author with rank
to the proposal, to carry the proposal. So the
original idea then was to put it in architecture as
a home. There's nothing unique about that. I
didn't particularly care for it. I didn't think it
was essentially appropriate at that time. But
there was no place else to put it. That's when Hal
Box was here. Yes. And Hal's an old friend, and
looked like we had a pretty trustful
relationship. It also looked, in the university
setting at that time, as everyone knows in Texas,
that whatever arrangement you made, we were also
raw and knew that it really wasn't going to make
much difference, that traditional academic
games and the theocracies of the disciplines
weren't going to be terribly painful here. Well,
clearly we've matured, and clearly that was
wrong. So, you know. They are painful, eh? Well,
they are, and obviously they're You know, this
university is just like all the rest of them.
Maturity is a pain in the patuggies in terms of
trying to be innovative, creative, and do some
things a little differently, or at least be
contemporary. So applied and professional
programs will always struggle on any university
campus.
It's kind of a given that there will always be a
little bit of indignity associated with it. Now,
with planning, they're never sure. It has a
certain ring of dignity about it that indicates
there must be some theory there. And if they ever
found out there wasn't, we'd all die. But at this
point, at least, we can go through the illusion.
It's good to have a course in your curriculum
called planning theory. Oh, yes. Oh, yes. And then
not acknowledge what it was at all. So just went
through one, by the way, though, as I said. major
kind of a question of theoretical perspective
that you find. I've just returned. I've taken a
class to Peru, and I've been taking classes abroad
here recently. And without even thinking about
it, our strategies theoretically for the
resolution of almost everything now in housing,
transportation, political process, you name it,
is mainstreaming. is that you shouldn't build
separate discrete units or try to organize
utopias or new neighborhoods or anything of the
sort. You really ought to integrate into the city
and let the dynamics of the natural market flow
kind of operate on it. And that way, people will
integrate into the society. And the society is a
self-healing phenomenon. That's our new theory
out there, if you want a bottom line trash. How
does, uh... I don't know how all that came about. We
just bought into that one. But, you know, when you
go abroad, they haven't bought it. Uh-huh. Well,
does a person like Mel Weber and his philosophy of
systems approach... Well, all of them, everybody
confirms it now. But no one acknowledges that it's
universal and that we just slipped into this one
day. Obviously, you can defend it now that we've
done it. I mean, clearly it's the right thing to do.
But I haven't seen a single article that debates
whether this is something we have to do in
absolutely everything. This notion of the
healing society out there, the race, see, here
come our people. Anthony Downs says, well, if you
dismiss black people out there in suburbia, the
race issue will go away. Well, thank you, Anthony.
I don't have to buy into that one. You got deaf kids?
Well, the problem is they find out if they study
only with deaf people, they find out they're deaf.
So it's better to keep them in public school with
all the rest of them, see? So it's universal.
Housing, well, you shouldn't have public housing
anymore, or you shouldn't build separate. You
should build on the street the same. Hey! And then
let the market factors... So it's the same... It's
the melting pot taken to the absurd extreme. Oh, as
a matter of fact, no, it's the manipulated melting
pot. And that the melting pot will, in effect, be a
positive resolution, or at least a resolution
appropriate to the political social realities of
our world. That doesn't mean it's going to be a
solution, however. Well, I don't know. But it hits
you in the face that when you go abroad,
we just had a meeting with Belunde here, who's an
architect planner, and he's built 175,000 units
of housing in the last four years. Doing fine. In
this dirt, he's building. Where is he building? In
Peru. One of the poorest countries in South
America. Oh, yes and no. It all depends on which
economy you wish to measure. The informal economy
is doing bad. Something's going on. But one of the
neighborhoods that we went to see is called Lima
Tambo. He took us there. And here's a neighborhood
that they've built. Visually, you can see it. It
would be very helpful as planning educators for us
not to individually, as departments, determine
what we think is appropriate. Now, there's a
little bit of that, of course, which is obvious. We
have a local market which dominates it. Probably
you guys at A&M don't have a local market. But we
clearly do with the Nellis-Fort Worth and this
broader north central Texas kind of an issue,
essentially growth being our critical concern.
Also the small city thing, which I mentioned
earlier, I think that's kind of our arena. But
really what would be helpful is to sit down and do a
needs determination statewide and decide who
does what best. In terms of skills, I think they're
essentially the same for all students. They
really ought to know how to work with micros today.
They ought to know what the database systems are.
Subdivision planning and that kind of trash and
planning, I think we've kind of moved beyond. But
they ought to know something about that. They
certainly should know the legal characters and
planning administration. So there are basic
theoretical and skill courses. But then the
emphasis areas, I think, are unique. I think they
certainly should know about the history of
planning. Absolutely. Well, they need to know all
the professional stuff that appropriately
identifies them with this as a meaningful field.
It would be my goal that every student would turn
out a thesis or some kind of a product that would be
appropriate for APA something of that sort. So
they are eligible members of the professional
community, you mentioned. For our M.U.P. degree,
we require a professional paper in the last
semester now. Well, I think that... It's not a
thesis, but it's sort of... I don't care. Like,
instead, we don't want to call it a thesis, because
then we'd have to go through the graduate college.
And we'd have to take attention to the margins.
Well, we're agreeing to all of that. I don't care
from a university perspective where we are. But in
terms of their... Whether they give a full paper or
whatever, they ought to, in my mind, be at APA for a
professional reason, as a panelist, as a paper
presenter. And they ought to have written
something that was submittable to it, whether
they go or not. That's another choice. So those
things, I think, are common to all the
departments. You mentioned one thing, that you
thought it would be good for the planning schools
to confer and make a decision about which one would
be teaching which subject. Well, here's where
I... No, I think there are emphasis areas of
specialties that, by all of us covering every
waterfront, economic, development, political,
you know, etc., none of us are doing very well, if
you want my candid opinion in terms of the
challenges in Texas. For example, the whole area
of economic development now, which is a major
issue in city after city, we're finding they're
hiring people from out of state or from other kinds
of divisions. That disappoints me. We should have
anticipated that ourselves as a profession and
grabbed it. Would you call, then, for a conference
of planning faculty and directors? If we could do
that without this one-upmanship, And I really
feel like we're kind of beyond that. I don't know
why I find it unpleasant to deal with the Austin
people periodically, but they do have an attitude
problem. And they kind of need to get rid of it.
Well, they're not the only school that has people
who have very definite ideas. Oh, I don't care
about that. I can deal with that. Because some of
them also have such non-voyant personalities
that you can just ignore them or whatever and say,
fine, that's just fine, you turkey. And frankly,
you know, A&M has a number of those as well. Those
are some of our flamboyant characters, and I don't
give a crap about that. If that means that you have
the skill to uniquely offer something better than
I, we're all going to cover everything. Give me a
break. But if you wanted a special, if your goal was
to be a small city planner, for example, I think we
offer the best access for it. Now, if your idea is
statewide or regional planning, we're just in on
that one. Don't put that on the tape. Erase that
from the tape. It's on the tape. But you
understand. We have a course in regional
planning. I don't even think we describe or
identify what a region clearly is. And A&M, I
think, is strong on planning law and land
development and transportation. All right.
We're fair in transportation. And history. We're
very big in history. Those are not, we cover them.
But if we came down there, then we could see what we
were missing and we could probably recruit to the
state. And we could, you see, one of the advocacies
also that's necessary, you know this as well as I, I
have to stop through city halls in this region
continually to look at their work job
descriptions and discover that these degrees
disappear as a part of the description with
regularity. Good point. We try to assume that
we're in a very stable employment market. Well,
forget it. They feel that if you're not
exclusively in the Department of City Planning
doing subdivision review or something trivial of
that sort, you're not. It's not a planner. The fact
that you might go into the Department of
Transportation, the Department of Water, Sewer,
Public Works even, in terms of the planning
components, we fight that war every day. Good.
That's great. Now, I do it by simply walking
through the city hall and calling for the job
descriptions, and I find the degree in planning
slips out of there very quickly. The second thing
is the advocacy of what is a planner. It used to be an
ugly word. We all know that. I mean, for Christ's
sake. Well, it's kind of legit now. You think it is?
Oh, yeah. Planning has come back into its own? Oh,
yeah, but the neighborhood movements and things
like that in Dallas and Fort Worth and here, we're
clean because the planners are citizen
advocates. I mean, see, we went through that wave,
and so the people we have placed out there, because
of that wave of the intellectual movement, you
know, when everything was citizenship, well,
those are our senior planners in this region now as
our graduates. So we have dignity, because we have
this citizen political force hitting the fan at
the same time. Now, any of them write, well, I don't
care. We're just very popular. Now, is there any
money? Well, forget it. But are we doing good? Hey,
we're hot. Well, that's interesting because I
hadn't been aware of this sort of swing back to
popularity. Well, with the folks. I can remember
back in 1953 when I entered planning, planners
could do no wrong. Oh, they were gods. Well, we had a
mystique surrounding us. Oh, yeah. And no one even
dared question that mystique. Listen, I worked
with Cal Hamilton for years. Oh, did you? Oh, yeah.
In Los Angeles? No, I worked with him in Pittsburgh
before he got fired there. Uh-huh. Oh, it was
wonderful. As a matter of fact, my prior book, I had
a million dollar grant from Cal. Do you like that
one? To simulate the city. Holy banana. Because we
had that arrogance in those days. That was 64, 65.
Yeah, we did have a lot of arrogance. Yeah, and
well, you want to know what else? I believed it was
possible. Well, you probably know all about Brett
Harris, though. Oh, yeah. And his dog and pony
show. about regional science, he would drag
around the country. Well, we all were. All of us
were stomping around America, and of course the
reality is we were probably right, but we were way
ahead of our methodological skills to make it all
possible. It really was a nonsense period, but it
was fun. Oh, yeah. And trashy comedy at the same
time is, I believed it was feasible. I mean, I could
laugh over the absurdity of these things today.
They really weren't absurd. They were feasible,
but no one wished to really acknowledge that the
databases were the pits. They were built upon
information that no more predicted a kind of a
logic. It was built on so many assumptions. My best
model was Tom. You had the name Tom. The
time-oriented metropolitan model. Well. Have
you heard of PLUM? Oh, no, what's PLUM? PLUM is
Projective Land Use Model. Oh, I like that. Well, I
had PUMP as well, the Phoenix Urban Minorities
Program. Ah, yes. We were still priming it when I
left. Yes. Well, anyway. My biggest study, by the
way, was Nipple. The National Inventory of Poor
People's Lives and Evaluation. And the
government had a conniption fit over that, so we
changed it to CUPS. Canadian Urban Poverty Study.
And they didn't like that, so we went to UPS. And
they kept telling me, you're really obscene.
So we ended with New Life. New Life. The National
Low Income Family Evaluation. Then I found out
that was a program in Vietnam, so it just I was
ruined. Just ruined. Must have been frustrating.
Well, if you name these studies, you can get
anything. Tom really was a good grid model.
I legally am, but actually I don't participate
that much in terms of the planning for the
department because my degree isn't in planning.
My primary appointment isn't in that department.
What is your primary appointment? Oh, it's in
urban affairs. Would you explain to me the
difference between... Urban affairs and urban
planning? Yeah, are they both departments or are
they... They were. At this point, we all seem to be
one glorious faculty. How many are there? How many
faculty? 12. 12. Do you know how many students you
normally enroll in the programs? I know for urban
affairs, I can't tell you for planning. I don't
know how many there are close to it. I think there
are about 50, 55 in planning. We have in the MA in
urban affairs, 58. And in the PhD program, about 60
at this time. 60? Uh-huh. Then for those who come in
for what we give corollary degrees, we give an MA in
MSW, an MA in Urban Journalism, which we kind of are
running but has not been completely approved by
the Coordinating Board, and then MA with Urban
Education. So those constitute another about 20
students, then the interdisciplinary students
that come. I see. So we only have graduate students
here in this entire faculty. There are no
undergraduate courses whatsoever. You don't
have any service courses for undergraduates? Not
a one. Now, we did for a while. And we've tried that
angle principally as a kind of a feeder mechanism
to encourage students to major. That simply
didn't work. Now, we also give city planning
courses here in the College of Engineering.
They're not really competitive. They are
engineering courses to a large extent. And it
hasn't really been a very big issue. But my role
with the planners here has been, even as a member of
that faculty, not to go to their meetings unless
they just needed my insight. You go to the
Sociology Institute meetings? yes if i go to any
and i go to urban affairs association which is a
small group and i go to apa and i go to the american
population association
that's kind of you know it's enough is enough yeah
you can get drowned oh yeah believe me apa is enough
oh and of course i go to that one out of kind of
fascination i've usually gone because i was
getting a paper or presentation and have been
active periodically with the local chapter. Our
students kind of dominate it. It's a big chapter.
The northern section. Uh-huh, sure. And so I have
periodically been active, but in the last two or
three years, really not. What is your perspective
on what they're doing in Austin with their
planning program? Do you have any facts to hold on
that? The thing is that Most of my concerns, I
think, really were registered in the first part of
this conversation. I wish someone would sit down
and realize what the state's needs really were,
and could help us establish a research and
placement agenda. I've never really known what
they teach. Well, that's where I am. I always feel
like we're contemplating the theories of Mao.
from that going into a kind of a philosophical way.
And you say, who's going to hire these turkeys?
We're in a staging in Texas of trying to bring urban
spaces along, trying to give them an essential
concept that you can get control of ordinances.
You can get control of streets. You can get control
of water, et cetera. And it'll pay you to do it. Now,
we're just at that still initial stage. My
analysis of manpower needs, which I did about four
years ago for planners as a part of a larger study,
was that if we could show them what they need, we
have about 4,000 positions open in this state that
meet those kinds of demands. But we haven't
examined how to fit that, how to match it. Also, we
haven't really told our students where these jobs
are or how to get them. We've had good liaison with
the Texas cities. We've had no difficulty with our
planning departments. I don't mean the League of
Texas cities. Yes, sure. But this has only been on
legislative matters. Sure. The state
legislature has not been with their local units,
their memberships. And maybe it should work the
other way. We should be working with the league in
terms of disseminating the need for getting
planning degrees as part of the job description.
Even for, say, consultants. Yes, consultants. In
this area, consulting firms constitute almost
50% of the employment for planners. And of course,
anyone can put planning in their title. Thank you
very much. And we should be preparing specially
for that. One of my students works for Segal
Associates, which is a national real estate
developer, evaluator, planner. Segal? Segal.
They do the Segal newsletters. Oh, not Ladislav
Segal. No. No. Nothing that noble or ennobling.
And so... But that kind of research in real estate
research, for example, which is appropriate for
our kinds of students, we really haven't tackled
that market. And we're in a data shortage right
now, which is unreal. What ever happened to the
1985 census? What ever happened to the 1985
census? for example. Whatever happened to that?
We were going on the five-year cycle, and then we
didn't go on the five-year cycle. Exactly. And no
one ever even mentioned it. Now, we did in the
American Population Association. Did you? Oh,
yeah. What was the answer? Mr. Reagan was elected.
Oh. Pardon me, I've got dry eyes. That explains a
lot of things. Yeah, that's what happened. That
was very simple. We lost the Biden. And the
question mark was, did we spend the money then for a
bad census? which was only going to give us total
count, and possibly raise, or, which wasn't very
hot, because you weren't going to get an age break
out, and what were you going to be able to do with it?
So, or would you save the money, hide it, realizing
that the same budget's coming up for the 1990
census that was there for 1980? You got the picture
now? So we took the 85 money and hid it. I won't ask
any more questions. Well, that's where it is.
Demography Magazine discussed this in the last
issue. Is this enough for you? Because I need to
take this.